---
layout: post
title:  "Starting point"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

## Past

I have always had a "server" running 24/7, doing private web serving, torrents, git/svn server etc.
Usually I have used laptops instead of desktop PC-s as my daily driver and replaced them maybe about every 5 years or so.
And previous daily driver become my new server replacing previous server.

<!--more-->

First servers had all the software installed in host Linux (usually Ubuntu). All services and configurations were all over
the place and replacing one server with new one meant installing new Linux, software packages, configuring them, copying all
needed files from previous server to new one and hope I did not forget anything. This process usually took days to setup.

At some point I started using Docker and all this replacing servers become a lot easier, taking maybe hours instead of days.

## Current

My latest server is HTPC because I thought I need something more powerful. I put watercooling in it because I did not like
the CPU fan noise. This turned out not to be good idea as it's not maintenance free and this PC is still not quiet as I hoped
it to be.

I also have Pine64 (2GB) and Raspberry Pi4 (1GB) running as Docker Swarm workers. They serve MQTT, Zigbee2MQTT, NodeRED, Nagios.
I like these boards as they run completely silent and are very stable, but usually these boards have limited resources, mostly
limited memory. And because these are using arm architecture and some of software I use does not work with arm (GitLab), then
these board are mainly additions to main server.

## Future

But because now there is first signs that GitLab can be [run on arm64]{:target="_blank"} and there is 8GB Pi4 available and
Apple* thinks arm is cool, then I think it's time to replace my server with new Pi4 (8GB). Maybe even swarm of Pi4-s.

I also have some IoT and automation stuff that will be covered here.

Currently I have ordered Raspberry Pi 4 with 8GB memory. Once it arrives, I will post all the whats, hows and whys of new setup.

\* I do not own any Apple products and I'm not a Apple fan

[run on arm64]: https://gitlab.com/gypsophlia/gitlab-build-arm64